Pakistan's principal natural resources are arable land and water. About 25% of Pakistan's total land area is under cultivation and is watered by one of the largest irrigation systems in the world. Agriculture accounts for about 23% of GDP and employs about 44% of the labor force.
Since the agriculture industry is a major part of Pakistan’s economy; up to date information needs to be provided to farmers where ever they may be present. Computers are one option for accessing information provided either on a CD or via the Internet. But computers are not always readily accessible by small-scale farmers and most of our farmers are not computer literate as well. Web-based mobile phones with Internet access provide another option but, again, not many farmers have such phones or Internet connectivity.

However, one alternative is available to many small-scale farmers: mobile phones with SMS (short message service) capability. With such mobile phones, text messaging and call centers are options for getting information to farmers. Another way to reach many farmers with mobile phones is through interactive voice response (IVR). With IVR, a farmer calls a phone number with a voice recording that presents a menu of questions about the farmer’s rice field and growing conditions. The farmer answers each question by pressing an appropriate number on the keypad. Once all questions are answered, the farmer receives a text message with a guideline on the amounts, sources, and timings of fertilizer application for his or her specific field.

Since not much research or work has been done in this field in Pakistan, we plan to provide substantial help to the farmers via this SMS & IVR system to produce more food with higher profitability.